



SAAG Working Group                                               R. Salz
Internet-Draft                                 Akamai Technologies, Inc.
Obsoletes: 4086 (if approved)                               29 July 2026
Intended status: Best Current Practice                                  
Expires: 30 January 2027


                           On Random Numbers
                       draft-rsalz-4086bis-latest

Abstract

   Things have changed a great deal in the two decades since RFC 4086,
   "Randomness Requirements for Security," was published.  In addition,
   as more IETF protocols use cryptography, the need for good-quality
   randomness has greatly increased.

   Copy from 4086 ?

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/richsalz/ietf-4086bis.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 30 January 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Structure of this Document
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
     2.1.  Entropy
     2.2.  Seed
     2.3.  Nonce
     2.4.  Random Bit Generator (RBG)
     2.5.  Pseudo-Random Number Generator (PRNG)
     2.6.  Deterministic Random Bit Generator (DRBG)
     2.7.  Backtracking resistance
     2.8.  Forward or Prediction resistance
   3.  Recommendations
   4.  Concerns
     4.1.  Fork
     4.2.  Uniform distribution
   5.  Security Considerations
   6.  IANA Considerations
   7.  Normative References
   Acknowledgments
   Author's Address

1.  Introduction

   Things have changed a great deal in the two decades since RFC 4086,
   "Randomness Requirements for Security," was published.  In addition,
   as more IETF protocols use cryptography, the need for good-quality
   randomness has greatly increased.

   Copy abstract from 4086 ?

1.1.  Structure of this Document

   This document first defines some commonly-used terms in the
   generation of random numbers.  The next section is short, and uses
   those terms to create best practice.  The following section lists
   some warnings about common concerns and mistakes.  Finally, it
   concludes with the standard IETF boilerplate sections.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP 14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

   The following sub-sections define commonly-used terms.  These area
   often mis-used, so the goal is to provide a common understanding.
   All of the definitions below should be taken in the context of
   cryptography.

2.1.  Entropy

   Entropy is a property, not a value, and it means how hard it is to
   guess the value.  For example, a coin flip as low entropy because
   there are only two choices and a four-digit PIN has no more than
   10,000 possibilities.  On the other hand, 256-byte SHA3 (ref needed)
   digest has very high entropy because it is extremely hard to predict.

   Good sources of entropy include hardware timings, mouse movements (if
   properly scaled) and the like -- things that are generated from
   hardware.  Common server systems often repeat the same actions every
   time the boot, which means that system-provided entropy might not be
   immediately available.

2.2.  Seed

   A seed is the specific value used to initialize an algorithm that
   generates random numbers.  The seed value should have high entropy.
   It is important that the seed not be disclosed, as an adversary could
   duplicate the bytes generated by the algorithm and determine any keys
   generated.

2.3.  Nonce

   A nonce is a number that is used once.  It need not be secret, and is
   often public or part of the protocol.  For example, QUIC defines a
   nonce that is used to detect if a packet has already been received.

   The non-repeatability can be highly important.  For example, if AES-
   GCM repeats a nonce, an adversary can determine the key.  AES-SIV is
   resistant to this.  It is common for a nonce to be a simple
   incrementing counter.

2.4.  Random Bit Generator (RBG)

   A device or algorithm that produces a sequence of bits that are both
   statistically independent, and unbiased.

   define those terms

2.5.  Pseudo-Random Number Generator (PRNG)

   Another name for DRBG.  It is not truly random because the sequence
   of bits is completely determined by the initial seed.

   https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pseudorandom_number_generator

2.6.  Deterministic Random Bit Generator (DRBG)

   An RBG that uses a seed and produces random bits provided the seed is
   not known.

   https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/sp/800/90/a/r1/final

2.7.  Backtracking resistance

   If an adversary knows the state of the RBG at a time T, they will be
   unable to predict the output at an earlier time, T - n, provided they
   are unable to perform the work that matches the claimed strength of
   the RBG.

   This is commonly called "forward secrecy" in protocols such as TLS.

   https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/backtracking_resistance

2.8.  Forward or Prediction resistance

   If an adversary knows the state of the RBG at a time T, they will be
   unable to predict the output at a later time, T + n, provided they
   are unable to perform the work that matches the claimed strength of
   the RBG.

   https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/prediction_resistance

3.  Recommendations

   Use local operating system if available.

   Use libraries such as OpenSSL.

   Determine the best entropy source available and use it to seed a
   DRBG, such as in OpenSSL.

   If possible, use a main DRBG to seed two separate DRBG's, one to
   generate private keys, and one for all other users.

4.  Concerns

4.1.  Fork

   It's common for a server to fork a separate client process for each
   incoming connection, or have a pool.  Reset the RNG when forking.

4.2.  Uniform distribution

   arc4random_uniform() if the upper bound isn't a power of two.
   https://github.com/openbsd/src/blob/master/lib/libc/crypt/
   arc4random_uniform.c

5.  Security Considerations

   This is an important document!

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

7.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

Acknowledgments

   TODO acknowledge.

Author's Address

   Rich Salz
   Akamai Technologies, Inc.
   Email: rsalz@akamai.com
